samples.txt                   Copyright (c) 1999-2011 Excelsior, LLC.
----------------------------------------------------------------

                  Excelsior XDS Win32 Edition
                  ---------------------------
                            v2.60

                       Sample Programs
                       ---------------

All sample programs in this distribution are provided for the 
Linux Edition. You can either work with samples in the xds/samples 
directory or copy them using the "xdssamp" script.

The `xdssamp' script accepts XDS root directory as a parameter
and copies all subdirectories containing samples to the current 
directory:

    mkdir ~/work
    cd ~/work
    xdssamp /usr/local/xds

The "samples" directory contains the following subdirectories:
        modula   - simple samples in Modula-2
        oberon   - simple samples in Oberon-2
        bench    - benchmark programs
        huffchan - Modula-2 device modules and low-level data
                   manipulations sample.
        nodes    - an Oberon-2 example, illustrating the using
                   of Oberon run-time support.
        X11      - X11/Motif samples

Each sample in directories "modula", "oberon" and "bench" consist
of one module only. Project files for these samples are not
provided. Just run for Native XDS-x86

        xc =m <filename>        

or run for XDS-C

        xm =m <filename>        

For example, to build the "hello" sample in the "modula" directory,
run for Native XDS-x86

        xc =m hello.mod

or run for XDS-C

        xm =m hello.mod

This invocation will build "hello".


samples/modula
--------------

The following tests are provided (in Modula-2):

        hello.mod       Hello, World program

        e.mod           Calculates digits of "e"
        exp.mod         Another exponent

        sieve.mod       Prime numbers

        fact.mod        Factorial
        bf.mod          Another factorial

        queens.mod      Solves 8 queens problem

        hisdemo.mod     History demo

        halt.mod        Termination
        term.mod        Termination
        except.mod      Exceptions

Tests "halt", "term" and "except" illustrate new ISO Modula-2
features, namely finalization and exceptions.

Tests "bf" and "hisdemo" are terminated abnormally. Both 
illustrate postmorten history. The GENHISTORY option must be 
set ON. If this option is not set ON in your configuration file,
set it in command line, e.g:

        xc =m hisdemo.mod +genhistory
or
        xm =m hisdemo.mod +gendebug

For "bf" test, the COVERFLOW option must be also ON.


samples/oberon
--------------

All tests in this directory do not use specific Oberon-2 features,
like type extensions (See "samples/nodes"). Some tests (exp, sieve)
are provided in Modula-2 also (see "samples/modula").

The following tests are provided (in Oberon-2):

        hello.ob2       Hello, World
        ackermann.ob2   Ackermann function
        exp.ob2         Calculates digits of "e"
        self.ob2        Print self text
        sieve.ob2       Prime numbers
        gcreport.ob2    Object finalization

The "gcreport" sample shows how to use "object finalization"
feature, implemented in the XDS run-time system. For each object
(pointer to record) a finalizing procedure can be defined.
This procedure is called by garbage collector when there are no more
references to the object. The procedure may add a reference to the
object (as it is done in the example). In this case the object will
not be deleted.


samples/bench
-------------

This directory contains several benchmark programs written in
Modula-2 and C. You can use them to compare XDS with other Modula-2
or C compilers.

Note, that the same code generator is used for Modula-2 and
Oberon-2 and the code quality is the same. However, speed of some
programs may change significantly when translating from Modula to
Oberon or vice versa. As a rule it is a result of incorrect
translation of whole types. For example, "INTEGER" type is 32-bit
wide in Modula and 16-bit wide in Oberon. If you don't replace
INTEGER by LONGINT when translating from Modula to Oberon the
performance of Oberon program will be worse (especially on
Pentium Pro).

The directory contains:
        dry.mod         Dhrystone Benchmark (Modula-2)
        dry.c           Dhrystone Benchmark (C)

        whet.mod        Whetstone Benchmark (Modula-2)

        linnew.mod      LinPack Benchmark   (Modula-2)
        linnew.c        LinPack Benchmark   (C)

In Modula-2 sources XDS options are set for maximum speed.


samples/huffchan
----------------

This sample illustrates the concept of device modules introduced
in the ISO Modula-2 input/output library, and low-level data
manipulation techniques.

        HuffChan.txt   - sample description
        HuffChan.def   - HuffChan device module
        HuffChan.mod   
        huf.mod        - file packing utility
        unhuf.mod      - file unpacking utility

To build this sample, type:

    xc =m huf.mod
    xc =m unhuf.mod
or
    xm =m huf.mod
    xm =m unhuf.mod

The sample contains the HuffChan device module, which may be 
used to perfrom Huffman encoding and decoding on channels opened
by other device modules, The two programs, "huf" and "unhuf",
utilize the HuffChan module facilities. The first program 
encodes a given file and writes it to another file; the
second one reverses that operation.


samples/nodes
-------------

The "nodes" subdirectory contains the following files, constituting
the Oberon-2 program:

        Nodes.ob2       - definition of abstract Node class
        Echo.ob2        - concrete Node extension
        GenEcho.ob2     - concrete Node extension
        Commands.ob2    - concrete Node extension
        Types.ob2       - concrete Node extension
        runme.ob2       - the top-level module
        runme.prj       - project file

To build the program on the command line, invoke:

        xc runme.prj =p
or
        xm runme.prj =p

The  "Nodes" module defines an abstract object (Node). Objects of
this  type  are  linked  in  the  list.  The  module "Nodes" also
implement  the  command  monitor  ("Loop"  procedure). The "Loop"
procedure  reads an input from keyboard and then passes the input
to  the  current  node,  or  if  the  input  line starts from "."
executes some standard action.

The  module  "runme"  imports  modules defining the extensions of
type  Node  (concrete  classes),  inserts it in the list and then
call "Nodes.Loop".

Nodes.Node extensions:
----------------------

"Echo"     - implements a node which prints its input to terminal.

"GenEcho"  - if the number N is specified in the input line
             creates "N" examples of the "Echo" Node.

"Commands" - provides facilities to call commands (exported
             parameterless procedures) in the form:
                ModuleName.ProcedureName
             Also implements operations to enumerate all modules
             in the program and all commands in the given module.

"Types"    - provides facilities to allocate an object by the
             given name in the form:
                ModuleName.RecordTypeName


Modules   "Types"   and   "Commands"  illustrates  the  using  of
meta-language   facilities,   including  the  command  calls  and
creating an object by its type name.

It is important to note, that the current version of XDS does not
support the dynamic loading of the modules. You can use commands
and types from the modules which are already linked in the program.


samples/X11
-----------

The "X11" subdirectory contains several X11/Motif samples written
in Modula-2:

        testx.mod
        Mand.mod
        Mand2.mod
        xmform.mod
        xmfont.mod
        XmDemos.ad

The "XmDemos.ad" file contains so called application defaults for Motif
samples. Copy it into your home directory or into your standard
app-defaults directory, removing the trailing ".ad".

testx.mod

The Modula-2 port of a C program that utilizes basic X11 features, such as
color selection and allocation, graphic primitives usage, and the message
loop that handles keyboard and mouse events. The program draws a set of
rectangles in a simple window. Clicking inside a window causes the
rectangles to be redrawn starting from the click position. Pressing the
"Q" key terminates the program.

Build command:

       xc =m testx.mod +xapp
or
       xm =m testx.mod +xapp


Mand.mod

A simple Mandelbrodt set visualizer. Note: works only with 8bpp color depth.
Illustrates arbitrary color map allocation and usage. Pressing the "Q" key
terminates the program.

Build command:

       xc =m Mand.mod +xapp
or
       xm =m Mand.mod +xapp


Mand2.mod

Mandebrodt Set Explorer. Illustrates arbitrary color set usage with any
color depth, image creation and drawing, mouse event handling. After launch
draws the entire set. Left click magnifies the image two times, right click
magnifies the image four times, middle click resets. The "D" key maps colors
to value ranges, the "I" key - to number of iterations. The "Q" key
terminates the program.

Build command:

       xc =m Mand2.mod +xapp
or
       xm =m Mand2.mod +xapp


xmform.mod

A simple Motif application. Illustartes XmForm widgets alignment technique
and resources usage. Draws the word "MOTIF" using buttons.

Build command:

       xc =m xmform.mod +xmapp
or
       xm =m xmform.mod +xmapp


xmfont.mod

A Motif application. Illustrates XmRowColumn widget features, menu creation
and usage, dialog creation and usage, XmScrolledWindow usage, and different
fonts handling. Intensively uses resources, including creation of its own
resources. Being launched, opens MainWindow with a menu and a scrollable
window, in which draws RowColumn. The dimensions and the orientation
of RowColumn are taken from resources. The RowColumn contains buttons
with font names (their lengths are also retrieved from resources). Pressing
a button displays a dialog that contains text drawn using the respective
font.

Build command:

       xc =m xmfont.mod +xmapp
or
       xm =m xmfont.mod +xmapp

                        [end of document]
